Good day I'm Norman Wildberger today we want
to start moving towards a bigger picture of
linear algebra we want to look at vectors and
matrices in a bigger novel way combining our
previous understanding of exles at Maxwell's which
already significantly enlarge the subject we want
to augment that now with our understanding of
negative numbers and integers so we'll get a lot
of new exciting directions and it's it's really
quite fascinating that we can restructure so much
of mathematics in this relatively simple ways
we're going to do in the next couple of videos
if you look in a classical linear algebra text you
see statements like this that here is a vector in
r3 or here's a vector in R for the assumption
is that we're so-called working over the real
numbers and we know that that's a little bit of
a fairy tale because if these were really real
numbers they would not look at all like this they
would rather it be involving the infinite sets of
infinite sets some huge conglomeration that
you can't actually write down so it's a very
disingenuous to to write a statement like
this already because the real number is far
from being something as simple minded is that but
nevertheless this is the usual story and the idea
is that these kinds of things say these vectors
here form a three dimensional linear or vector
space meaning basically that we can add them or
scalar multiply them or maybe combined addition
with scalar multiplication so here's an example
of taking a vector adding a three times another
vector and getting another vector so it's a
kind of a closed system with respect to these
operations of addition and scalar multiplication
on the other hand we have say our for which is
another space it's a four-dimensional space and
itself also has this sort of closed aspect with
respect to addition and scalar multiplication
but generally speaking these things don't really
interact with each other there's are three over
here and are four over here and are five over
there are two down there and there's this sort
of separateness to linear algebra we are going
to be much more all-inclusive we want to put
everything together in one framework so that
everything is visible pretty well at the same
time and everything can interact with everything
else so a much richer algebraic structure is
what we're interested in okay and for us well
we're going to be just working over the integers
that's our aim okay in fact in practice in when
you do linear algebra in reality you always
really only work over the integers rationals
or with floating-point decimals that's just the
way the world is that's the real world the real
world does not use real numbers but of course
linear algebra is not just about vectors it's
also about matrices in fact it's principally
about matrices really so the classical view of
matrices look something like this so in a linear
algebra textbook you might see something like this
it's a two-by-two array or matrix might use this
notation it's a belongs to the matrices two-by-two
from our or over here we have an example of a
three by two matrix from our and again though
are here is quite disingenuous it's not all the
case that these entries are real numbers because
if they were then there would be an infinite
amount of information encoded there there'd be
some huge infinite hard drive required to specify
what's going on there visibly obviously not what's
going on but students are led to see this kind of
thing often enough so that the idea that they're
working over the real numbers gradually over many
years sinks in with some residual osmosis of this
belief that oh we're working over the real when
we're doing linear algebra well in real fact the
the reality is completely different from that so
in the standard treatment we look at say something
like this it's a six dimensional linear space
the space of all 3 by 2 matrices forms a six
dimensional linear space while this two-by-two
space of matrices forms a four-dimensional space
which is also an algebra so again we have this
idea sort of separate domains the 3 by 2 matrices
over here the two-by-two matrices over here and so
on now there is a bit of interaction but it's very
selective and and there's something different that
happens for the 3 by 2 matrices and the two-by-two
matrices the two-by-two matrices are closed
under multiplication so the product of this
matrix times this matrix is another 2 by 2 matrix
but we don't have a corresponding product of 3 by
2 matrices but we could multiply this three by
two matrix by this two by two matrix if we put
them in the right positions ok so again what we
want to do is we want to really expand our view we
want to have a much bigger and broader picture of
this whole story so we want to look at all these
matrices all at the same time ok we're creating a
framework in which uniformly we're going to look
across the entire board and see all the matrices
and they're all potentially able to interact with
each other ok it's a much richer and more powerful
view than we currently have in linear algebra so
one of the benefits that one gets by thinking
about foundational issues as we're doing here
in this channel and particularly in this playlist
ok so one of the only places on planet earth where
we're really taking the foundations of mathematics
seriously and as a result we're able to harvest
understanding that's just inaccessible to a lot
of other mathematicians big advantage in thinking
clearly about foundational issues and recognizing
the importance the crucial importance of getting
the foundations so with matrices there's a wider
choice of possible sizes because it's basically
a two dimensional situation as opposed to the
one-dimensional situation for vectors so we
can kind of you know create a picture like this
where we see the various matrix spaces so here's
maybe the space of one by one matrices and here's
the space of one by two matrices and so on and so
there's all these different spaces of matrices
currently and the multiplication of matrices
is rather selective so an m-by-n matrix can be
multiplied by P times Q matrix only if N equals
P so if this number and this number agree then
we are able to multiply matrices of this kind by
matrices of this kind and then we get matrices of
the kind M by Q so there's interaction with these
matrices classically but it's a rather selective
and limited kind of interaction so we want to have
a bigger picture of this so the way we're going
to enlarge our subject is by taking this 21st
century point of view where we go from vectors
to vex Souls and from matrices to Maxim's now
these are concepts that are built up from a data
structure point of view and they do really depend
on having ingested the understandings that we've
been developing in this series on data structures
there's so there's a dozen or two videos on data
structures at different kinds sets multi sense
ordered sets lists so if you're just coming to
this series at this stage you probably really do
want to go back to those videos and watch them and
ingest that information okay so a singleton is a
list consisting of a single number in other words
it's a one list and then a vessel is an M set or
multi set of Singleton's that's how we define what
of excellence and a pixel is a to list of numbers
and i'm axel is an M set or multi set of pixels so
here very briefly is how we build up what vessels
and Maxwell's vexel zand max those are both
examples of multi sets of a particular kind vexel
is a multi set whose entries are single tips while
am Axl is a multi set whose entries are pixels as
single jenny is a list of just a single number
while a pixel is a list of two numbers those
are the one dimensional version this is the two
dimensional version now up to now in our treatment
of maxwell's and vessels we have previously been
working with a framework of natural numbers where
we start with one okay our natural numbers
formerly started with one two three and so on
but now we understand that from a multi set point
of view if we're thinking about natural numbers as
primitive natural numbers it's best to start at
zero and so we have to augment our understanding
here to stretch just a little bit further than
it used to be to include not just the natural
numbers bigger than or equal to 1 but also 0 as
well so just to make sure we're all in the same
page here is a list of the current conventions or
definitions that we're using so natural numbers
means an M set of marks which includes the mtm
set and that number is called 0 here is the M set
with a single mark it's the number one there's
a hindu-arabic form of it here's the M set 2
and so on so we will be using the hindu-arabic
names for these natural numbers but we should
be aware that it's really these M sets of marks
which are the fundamental objects these things
here are just names convenient names for them
all right then our Singleton's a singleton is
a list of natural numbers of size 1 so here are
Singleton's there's a singleton with the number
0 in it there's a singleton with the number one
in there's a singleton with a number two in and
so on so if we actually were officially going to
say what this singleton we would actually have to
replace this too with the M set consisting of two
marks so technically speaking that singleton is
actually an M set which contains itself an AM
set which has two marks in it but we'll stick
with that because it's easier for us to understand
although our computer would be quite happy sort of
dealing at this more assembly level kind of level
alright and then a vexel is by definition an M
set of Singleton's so for example here is a vessel
it's an M set consisting of Singleton's there's a
single on 00 22 23 now this particular vessel can
be conveniently represented as either kind of a
row vector or as a column vector but because we're
including 0 now this is a new development that is
different from our former treatment of the subject
we have to proceed a little bit differently now we
have a couple of zeros here these two zeros are
represented in a row vector by the number two
in the zero spot and then if we look at how many
singleton ones there are there aren't any so we
put a zero we look at how many singleton tues
there are there's three of them we look at how
many singleton threes there are there's one of
them we look at the number of singledom fours
there are there 0 of them but we don't have to put
that zero there so this is a representation this
is basically a multiplicity list that describes
the am set but notice that we're introducing
something a little bit different we're introducing
this framed first entry this is now the zero entry
formerly we were starting with one we would have
written one something like this if there weren't
any zero Singleton's but we do want to allow
singleton zeros and so we want to actually make
sure we all understand that this is the spot
reserved for a zero the index zero if we write
things vertically it's the same kind of story now
our vector is sort of from top down to the bottom
and we have 20 31 again representing the numbers
of 0 Singleton's 1 Singleton's to Singleton's and
3 Singleton's in our m set so you should think
about these things here as being representatives
they are ways of writing down almost like
shortcuts but this here is actually the real
object the real object is an M set of Singleton's
and these vectors are just ways of representing
that emsett you know sort of convenient shorthand
form right so what happens when we go to the two
dimensional situation we have pixels and max holes
instead of Singleton's and mixels well a pixel
is a list of natural numbers of size 2 here are
some examples of pixels there's a pixel pixel 00
there's pixel 01 these are lists you can see that
because first of all they have square brackets and
there's comments so the commas telling us that the
order matters in this little data structure that's
the first element that's the second element and
repetitions are allowed it's a list so these are
all examples of pixels pixels from natural numbers
and then am axle is an M set of pixels of multi
set of pixels so for example here is a maxell and
it's a maximum involving pixels 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 0
and so on the order doesn't matter repetitions
are allowed there's a repetition there's quite
a bit of repetition there so we can represent
this maxell in a more familiar matrix kind of
formulation by drawing a two-dimensional picture
of it and this is going to be a little bit of a
departure from what we did previously because we
have to take into consideration that we now have
0 as a possible index which is good okay this
is great this is a great development okay so we
have now zero as a possible index that means that
this top entry here is telling us how many pixels
of kind 00 there are in our maxell there's just
one of these so that's why we have a 1 there this
is the 01 position and so how many 01 pixels are
there there's just one of them right there this
is the 10 position and there are two such pixels
so we put it to there this is the 11 position you
can see that there's no 1 1 pixel so we can put
a 0 there there's no one to but there are some 13
pixels there's one two three four five so we put
a 5 there and this 3 here represents the three
pixels of form 3 comma 2 there's one two three
of them and these are in the position they're 0
1 2 3 0 1 2 so this is the 32 position it might be
helpful to her label for beginners the position so
that's the zero position the one position the two
positions of three position and correspondingly
across the top 0 1 2 3 so what we were doing
previously when we were considering Maxwell's
just over the natural numbers starting at one is
basically we were looking at possibilities that
exclude that first top column or row so basically
starting here so we're expanding that so now we
have a sort of another ribbon on top and ribbon to
the left so we have a border row and column that
correspond to this index 0 and notice that the
entries here are not going to clearly specified
we could put a 0 there if we wanted to it wouldn't
say anything more this is just a representation
of this thing so this thing is not really unique
you could put lots of zeros throughout here and
then it would look different but the fundamental
multiset that it's encoding is always the same
completely uniquely specified so this is the this
is the actual object here this is a convenient
representation for it all right so now we're in a
position to extend our understanding to integers
so if we're talking about vectors or vessels why
don't we extend to include negative numbers a Veck
soul is a multi set of Singleton's the singletons
up to now have just contained natural numbers so
we can extend things by considering Singleton's of
natural numbers as well as Singleton's of negative
numbers we get a more general object so this one
here has a couple of Singleton's of minus three
there's a minus one couple of zeros for number
two's and there's another zero over there because
things are not already ordered now this multi
said I remind you can be expressed sometimes
more efficiently by using multi set ideas of
arithmetic with multi sense so we can think of
it as being two times the multi set consisting
of the singleton minus three plus the multi set
consisting of a single 2-1 three times the multi
set consisting of the singleton 0 plus 4 times the
multi set consisting of the singleton 2 and then
if we introduce a sort of a more compact notation
for this kind of thing so if we replace the same
with e to the minus 3 this would ease the minus
1 e 0 e sub 2 then we can express W as a linear
combination of these sort of fundamental kind of
multisets or Maxwell's in this case e sub n is the
multi set consisting of the single singleton em
where now n is allowed to be an integer not just
a natural number so this particular vexel can now
be represented in our freeze kind of notation
but we have to extend our view more symmetric
clay because there are not just number of zeros
ones and twos there's also a certain number of
minus ones fact one of them and there's a certain
number of minus 3s two of them so this row freeze
represents this vexel with integer single tips I
note that we put bars here around the zeroth entry
because this thing's are free-floating it goes
off indefinitely to the right and to the left so
in order to know where things are we're going to
position the central location very visibly right
so this band that's the zero label and that's the
one index to index the minus 1 index 2-2 index 2-3
index and so on and if we wanted to represent
it vertically well we can just do it this way
there's the column freeze corresponding we still
have this distinguished place that represents the
zero index and now we have increasing labels
going down here and decreasing labels going up
here so now a vector is just a very special case
of this more general kind of object which has
both our right handed and a left-handed aspect
it's now symmetrical okay it's no longer that
we're starting on the left and then it's sort of
one-sided building only to the right now we have
the possibility of having this data structure
which is really symmetrical okay that's a very
big advantage in thinking about negative numbers
as well as natural numbers we have that symmetry
between the two that's reflected here in the
geometry of this is freeze and of course we can do
arithmetic with these two sided kind of vessels so
for example here is a vexille and here's another
vessel with both positive natural number indices
and also negative number indices there's the
zero spot there's a zero spot if we add them well
then we're going to add component wise but we do
in such a way that the sort of labels correspond
so this three-year this one will add to give for
this zero at five gives us five this four and two
gives us six this emptiness here and together with
this one gives us one on the negative side 1 plus
seven is 80 plus zero here is 0 and this 2 plus
0 is 2 we see that there's no need for these
vectors or vessels to look like they have the
same size that's not an obstruction to being able
to do arithmetic with them because this is just
really short head for this which is more like the
real object so this here is the M set represented
by this we have 2-3 s minus 1 3 zeros no one's
and four twos and over here we have 7 minus ones
a single 05 one's a couple of tues & 3 and when
we add them well we're really doing is we're just
doing emsett addition we're just putting all
these Singleton's together just putting all of
them in and them in in the same box or em set
and then we get this whole collection here and
that's really what we're doing when we're doing
this arithmetic here and of course then there's
a question of how does this all extend to the
maximal story what we learn about that in our
next video next week hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening